Create blog post about Prometheus and OpenTelemetry (#4119)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/prom-and-otel/index.md

---
title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry: Better Together
linkTitle: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry
date: 2024-03-10
author: 
  [Reese Lee](https://github.com/reese-lee) (New Relic),
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (ServiceNow)
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
# canonical_url: http://somewhere.else/ # This will be added in future
---

![Image of a Greek god holding a torch with the Prometheus logo, and OTel logo](Prom-and-otel-logos.png)

Tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) help us maintain the health, performance, and 
availability of our complex distributed systems. Both are open source projects 
under the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/) 
umbrella – but what role does each play in observability? 

OpenTelemetry (OTel for short), is a vendor-neutral open standard for 
instrumenting, generating, collecting, and exporting telemetry data. Prometheus 
is a fixture of the observability landscape, widely relied upon for monitoring 
and alerting within organizations. 

> While both Prometheus and OTel emit metrics, there is a lot to cover on the 

Reviewer: i'd suggest to start with the most important distinction between otel and prom - otel is about instrumenting/exporting, and is *NOT* a backend to store metrics (or any telemetry). Where prometheus is all about *THE* place to store metrics, but it also include clients as well.

Author: Ah yes, of course. I modified the "Prometheus" section:
* Renamed it to "OTel vs Prometheus"
* Added this:

>Since OTel is primarily focused on the instrumentation part of observability,
> it doesn't provide a backend for storing telemetry; you have to forward the 
> data to a backend vendor for storage, alerting, and querying. 
> 
> Prometheus, on the other hand, provides a time-series data store you can use 
> for your metrics, in addition to instrumentation clients. You can view 
> graphs and charts, set up alerts, and query your data via their web user 
> interface. It also encompasses a data format, known as [Prometheus 
> text-based exposition format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#exposition-formats).

differences and similarities, and is out of scope for this article. Rather, we 
want to show you how OTel supports Prometheus, specifically in a Kubernetes 
environment. You will learn:
* How the OTel Collector's Prometheus Receiver can be used to ingest Prometheus 
metrics.
* How the OTel Operator's Target Allocator (TA) can be used for Prometheus 
service discovery. 
* How the TA ensures even distribution of Prometheus targets. 
* Alternative methods for Prometheus metric collection through OTel-native 
options such as the K8s cluster receiver and Kubelet stats receiver.  

## Prometheus
Prometheus encompasses many things, including [a time-series data store, 

> monitoring and alerting tool](https://prometheus.io/), and [data format](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/fundamentals/intro-to-prometheus/), known as [Prometheus 

Reviewer 2: Is "service" or "server" a better term than "tool" in this case? When I think of the Prometheus tool, I think of the command line [promtool](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/command-line/promtool/).

> monitoring and alerting tool](https://prometheus.io/), and [data format](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/fundamentals/intro-to-prometheus/), known as [Prometheus 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
monitoring and alerting tool](https://prometheus.io/), and data format, known as [Prometheus 
```

dont think this link is required

text-based exposition format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#exposition-formats).

Prometheus _data_ is stored as a dimensional time-series, meaning that the data 
has attributes (i.e. labels/dimensions) and a timestamp. 

> The Prometheus _tool_ collects Prometheus metrics data from targets defined in a 

Reviewer 2: Server sounds more precise here, it's also the term the [Prometheus docs](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/) themselves use.
```suggestion
The Prometheus _server_ collects Prometheus metrics data from targets defined in a 
```

configuration file. A target is an endpoint that supplies metrics for the 
Prometheus tool to store.

Prometheus is so ubiquitous in the monitoring space that many tools natively 
emit metrics in Prometheus format, including [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/) and [HashiCorp's Nomad](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/docs/operations/monitoring-nomad). And for those that don’t, there are a number 

> of vendor- and community-built Prometheus exporters to aggregate and import data 

Reviewer: prometheus clients instead of Prometheus exporter would be more apt.

into Prometheus.

While you can use Prometheus to monitor a variety of infrastructure and 
application metrics, one of its most popular use cases is to monitor Kubernetes. 
This is the aspect of Prometheus monitoring that we will focus on in this 
article.

## Prometheus Metrics with OpenTelemetry
In this section, you will learn about a couple of OTel collector components that 
demonstrate the interoperability between OTel and Prometheus.  

First, let’s do a quick refresher on the [collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/) 

> – it’s an OTel component that can be used to collect and export data to and from 
> multiple sources and destinations. It also handles additional telemetry 

Reviewer 2: "To and from multiple sources and destinations" sounds like the wrong way around:
```suggestion
– it’s an OTel component that can be used to collect and export data from and to 
multiple sources and destinations, respectively. It also handles additional telemetry 
```

processing, such as modifying data attributes and scrubbing personally 
identifiable information. For example, you can use Prometheus SDKs to generate 

> metrics, ingest them with the collector, do some processing (if desired) and 

Author: Got it! Will make sure they're all capitalized. Thank you.

then forward them to your chosen backend. 

![Diagram showing the different components of the OTel collector](OTel-collector-refresher.png)

> The [Prometheus receiver](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#prometheus-receiver) allows you to collect metrics from any software that 

Author: Ooo this is a question for @svrnm perhaps?

> The [Prometheus receiver](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#prometheus-receiver) allows you to collect metrics from any software that 

Reviewer 3: link to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver

exposes Prometheus metrics. It serves as a drop-in replacement for Prometheus to 
scrape your services, and supports the [full set](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/v2.28.1/docs/configuration/configuration.md#scrape_config) of configurations in 
`scrape_config`. 

> If you are interested in [exemplars](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars), which is a recorded value that associates OTel context to a metric 

Reviewer 2: [Nit]
```suggestion
If you are interested in [exemplars](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars), which is a recorded value that associates OTel context with a metric 
```

event, you can also use the Prometheus receiver to ingest them in the Prometheus 
format and convert it to OTLP format. This enables you to correlate traces with 
metrics. 

Something to consider with this component is that it is under active 
development; as such, it has several [limitations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md#%EF%B8%8F-warning), including that it’s a stateful component. Additionally, it is recommended to not 
use this component when multiple replicas of the collector are run, because in 
this state: 
* The collector is unable to auto-scale the scraping 
* If the replicas are running with the same config, it will scrape the targets 
multiple times
* You will need to configure each replica with a different scraping config if 
you want to manually shard the scraping

> The [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter) allows you to ship data in the 

Author: Thank you @gouthamve ! I modified this section like so:

> For exporting metrics from the OTel Collector to Prometheus, you have two options: 
> the [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter), and the [Prometheus Remote Write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md).
> 
> The Prometheus exporter allows you to ship data in the Prometheus format, which is 
> then scraped by a Prometheus server. It's used to report metrics via the Prometheus 
> scrape HTTP endpoint. You can learn more by trying out this [example](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/main/example/prometheus). However, the scraping won't really scale, as all the metrics are sent in a single scrape. 
> 
> To get around the scaling concern, you can alternatively use the Prometheus Remote Write exporter, which allows you to push data to Prometheus from multiple Collector 
> instances with no issues. Since Prometheus also accepts remote write ingestion, you 
> can also use this exporter if you are generating OTel metrics and want to 
> ship them to a backend that is compatible with Prometheus remote write. Learn more about the architecture of both exporters [here](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/07/20/a-practical-guide-to-data-collection-with-opentelemetry-and-prometheus/#6-use-prometheus-remote-write-exporter). 

Is this technically accurate, and does it effectively convey your recommendation?

> The [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter) allows you to ship data in the 

Reviewer 4: This is great!

> Prometheus format, which can then be scraped by a Prometheus server. It is used 

Reviewer 2: I think the wording "Prometheus server" here confirms my thinking at the beginning of the document, i.e. that "server" is the right term rather than "tool".

to report metrics via the Prometheus scrape HTTP endpoint. You can learn more by 
trying out this [example](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/main/example/prometheus). 

On the flip side, if you are generating OTel metrics and you want to ship them 
to a backend that is compatible with Prometheus remote write (such as 
[Thanos](https://thanos.io/)), you can use the [Prometheus remote write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md). Prometheus remote write allows you to write data to external storage – in 
this case, backends that are compatible with Prometheus. 

## Using the Target Allocator 
A common challenge with Prometheus is that of scalability, which is the ability 
to effectively maintain performance and resource allocation while managing an 
increasing number of monitored targets and metrics. One option to help with this 

> is **sharding** the workload based on labels or dimensions, [which means using multiple Prometheus instances to handle your metrics according to specific parameters](https://www.atatus.com/blog/prometheus-architecture-scalability/#:~:text=Key%20Limitations%20of%20Prometheus,-Long%2DTerm%20Storage&text=Scalability%3A%20Extremely%20big%20environments%20with,availability%2C%20which%20influences%20system%20resilience.). This could help 

Reviewer 2: Is the period at the end of the URL superfluous?
```suggestion
is **sharding** the workload based on labels or dimensions, [which means using multiple Prometheus instances to handle your metrics according to specific parameters](https://www.atatus.com/blog/prometheus-architecture-scalability/#:~:text=Key%20Limitations%20of%20Prometheus,-Long%2DTerm%20Storage&text=Scalability%3A%20Extremely%20big%20environments%20with,availability%2C%20which%20influences%20system%20resilience). This could help 
```

decrease the burden on individual instances. However, there are two things to 
onsider with this approach.  

> The first is that to get around querying sharded instances, you need a 

Reviewer 5: +1 the reason people shard is usually for some amount of fault tolerance as well. I.e. if one prometheus is OOMing, your entire alerting pipeline won't be offline

management instance; this means that you need to have N+1 Prometheus instances, 
where the +1’s memory is equal to N, thereby doubling your memory requests. 

> Secondly, Prometheus sharding requires that each instance scrape the target, 

Reviewer 5: @gouthamve i didn't realize prometheus does the instance dropping too, very neat! I assumed it didn't because it shows the dropped targets in the prometheus scraper ui. Thanks for sharing :D

* **config:** This is where the OTel collector config resides.

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: opentelemetry
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  targetAllocator:
    enabled: true
    serviceAccount: opentelemetry-targetallocator-sa
    prometheusCR:
      enabled: true
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:
      prometheus:
        config:
          scrape_configs:
          - job_name: 'otel-collector'
            scrape_interval: 30s
            static_configs:
            - targets: [ '0.0.0.0:8888' ]
        target_allocator:
          endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
          interval: 30s
          collector_id: "${POD_NAME}"
…
```

To use the Target Allocator, you need to set `spec.targetallocator.enabled` to 
`true`. (See note above about supported modes.)

To use the Prometheus service discovery functionality, you’ll need to do two things:

First, you need to enable it by setting `spec.targetallocator.prometheusCR.enabled` 
to `true`.

> Next, you need to make sure that the[ Prometheus receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you need to make sure that the [Prometheus receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md) 
```

Author: Ooo good catch, thank you!

Prometheus configurations:

```yaml
- apiGroups: [""]
  resources:
  - nodes
  - nodes/metrics
  - services
  - endpoints
  - pods
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- apiGroups: [""]
  resources:
  - configmaps
  verbs: ["get"]
- apiGroups:
  - discovery.k8s.io
  resources:
  - endpointslices
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- apiGroups:
  - networking.k8s.io
  resources:
  - ingresses
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
- nonResourceURLs: ["/metrics"]
  verbs: ["get"]
```

If you enable the `prometheusCR` (set `spec.targetAllocator.prometheusCR.enabled` 
to `true`) in the `OpenTelemetryCollector` CR, you will also need to define the 
following roles. These give the Target Allocator access to the `PodMonitor` and 
`ServiceMonitor` CRs. It also gives namespace access to the `PodMonitor` and 
`ServiceMonitor`.

```yaml
- apiGroups:
  - monitoring.coreos.com
  resources:
  - servicemonitors
  - podmonitors
  verbs:
  - '*'
- apiGroups: [""]
  resources:
  - namespaces
  verbs: ["get", "list", "watch"]
```

## Additional OTel Components for Kubernetes

This section covers additional OTel collector components you can use to capture 
Kubernetes metrics. 

Receiving data:

> * [Kubernetes Cluster Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver#example): collects cluster-level metrics and 

Reviewer 2: I guess pointing to the example is unnecessary?
```suggestion
* [Kubernetes Cluster Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver): collects cluster-level metrics and 
```

entity events from the [Kubernetes API server](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-apiserver/)

> * [Kubernetes Objects Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sobjectsreceiver):  collects (pull/watch) objects from the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Kubernetes Objects Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sobjectsreceiver): collects (pull/watch) objects from the 
```

Kubernetes, including Kubernetes-specific ones as well as general-use 
processors, such as the batch, memory limiter, and resource processors. You can 
read more about them [here](docs/kubernetes/collector/components/). 

After you’ve configured the components in your collector config file, you need 
to enable them within the [pipelines](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#pipelines) section. A data pipeline enables you to [collect](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#receivers), [process](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#processors), 
and route data from any source [to one destination or more](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters). 

## Pros & Cons
However you decide to use OTel to gather Prometheus metrics, ultimately what is 
right for your organization depends on your business needs. Using the OTel 
components discussed above, you could convert all your metrics into the 
Prometheus format, or you could convert your Prometheus metrics into OTLP. 
Although Prometheus itself was not built for long-term data storage and presents 

> scaling challenges, there are tools such as [Grafana](https://grafana.com/), 

Reviewer 2: Do you perhaps mean Grafana Mimir, as opposed to Grafana? Grafana Mimir is Grafana Labs' horizontally scalable/long term storage Prometheus compatible product, and is comparable to Thanos and Cortex (Grafana Mimir was initially forked from Cortex):
```suggestion
scaling challenges, there are products such as [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/), 
```

---
title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry: Better Together
linkTitle: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry
date: 2024-03-10
author: 
  [Reese Lee](https://github.com/reese-lee) (New Relic),
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (ServiceNow)
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
# canonical_url: http://somewhere.else/ # This will be added in future
---

![Image of a Greek god holding a torch with the Prometheus logo, and OTel logo](Prom-and-otel-logos.png)

> Tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) help us maintain the health, performance, and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) help us monitor the health, performance, and 
```

management instance; this means that you need to have N+1 Prometheus instances, 
where the +1’s memory is equal to N, thereby doubling your memory requests. 
Secondly, Prometheus sharding requires that each instance scrape the target, 
even if it’s going to be dropped. 

Something to note is that if you can have a Prometheus instance with the 
combined amount of memory of individual instances, there is not much benefit
to sharding, since you can scrape everything directly using the larger 
instance. A reason that people shard is usually for some amount of fault 
tolerance. For example, if one Prometheus instance is out of memory (OOM), 
then your entire alerting pipeline won't be offline. 

Luckily, the OTel Operator’s Target Allocator (TA) is able to help with 
some of this. For instance, it can automatically drop any targets it knows won’t 
be scraped. Whereas if you shard with `hashmod`, you'll need to [update your
config based on the number of replicas you have](https://www.robustperception.io/scaling-and-federating-prometheus/).
Plus, if you’re already collecting Prometheus metrics about your 
Kubernetes infrastructure, using the TA is a great option.

> The Target Allocator is part of the OTel Operator. The OTel Operator is a [Kubernetes Operator](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) that:

Reviewer 6: A link to the operator would be helpful

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Target Allocator is part of the OTel Operator. The [OTel Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator) is a [Kubernetes Operator](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/operator/) that:
```

> * Manages the [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector/)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Manages the [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector/)
* Provides support for a fleet of Collectors via the [OpAMP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/tree/main/cmd/operator-opamp-bridge)
```

How is the above edit, @pavolloffay?

> * Injects and configures [auto-instrumentation](https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/what-is-auto-instrumentation) into your pods

Reviewer 6: there is as well opAPM

Reviewer 7: Updated!

without needing to install Prometheus. The TA manages the configuration of the 
Collector’s Prometheus Receiver.

The Target Allocator serves two functions:
* Even distribution of Prometheus targets among a pool of OTel Collectors
* Discovery of Prometheus custom resources

Let’s dig into each of these.

#### Even distribution of Prometheus targets
The Target Allocator’s first job is to discover targets to scrape and OTel 
Collectors to allocate targets to. It does so as follows:

1. The Target Allocator finds all of the the metrics targets to scrape
2. The Target Allocator finds all of the available Collectors
3. The Target Allocator determines which Collectors scrape which metrics
4. The Collectors query the Target Allocator to find out what metrics to scrape
5. The Collectors scrape their assigned targets

This means that the OTel collectors -- not a Prometheus scraper -- collect 
the metrics.

A **Target** is an endpoint that supplies Metrics for Prometheus to store. A 
**Scrape** is the action of collecting Metrics through an HTTP request from a 
targeted instance, parsing the response, and ingesting the collected samples 
to storage.

> ![Data flow from Target Allocator to the OTel Collector.](target-allocator-sharding.png)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  ```mermaid
  sequenceDiagram
    participant Target Allocator
    participant Metrics Targets
    participant OTel Collectors
    Target Allocator ->>Metrics Targets: 1. Discover Metrics targets
    Target Allocator ->>OTel Collectors: 2. Discover available Collectors
    Target Allocator ->>Target Allocator: 3. Assign Metrics targets
    OTel Collectors ->>Target Allocator: 4. Query TA for Metrics endpoints scrape
    OTel Collectors ->>Metrics Targets: 5. Scrape Metrics target
  ```

```

> ![Data flow from Target Allocator to the OTel Collector.](target-allocator-sharding.png)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart RL
  pm(PodMonitor)
  sm(ServiceMonitor)
  ta(Target Allocator)
  oc1(OTel Collector)
  oc2(OTel Collector)
  oc3(OTel Collector)
  ta --> pm
  ta --> sm
  oc1 --> ta
  oc2 --> ta
  oc3 --> ta
  sm ~~~|"1. Discover Prometheus Operator CRs"| sm
  ta ~~~|"2. Add job to TA scrape configuration"| ta
  oc3 ~~~|"3. Add job to OTel Collector scrape configuration"| oc3
````
```

#### Discovery of Prometheus custom resources
The Target Allocator’s second job is to provide the discovery of Prometheus 
Operator CRs, namely the [ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/tree/main/cmd/otel-allocator#target-allocator). 

In the past, all Prometheus scrape configurations had to be done via the 
Prometheus Receiver. When the Target Allocator’s service 
discovery feature is enabled, the TA simplifies the configuration of the 
Prometheus receiver, by creating scrape configurations in the Prometheus 
receiver from the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor instances deployed in your 
cluster.

> ![How the Target Allocator's service discovery feature works](target-allocator-promcr.png)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```mermaid
flowchart RL
  pm(PodMonitor)
  sm(ServiceMonitor)
  ta(Target Allocator)
  oc1(OTel Collector)
  oc2(OTel Collector)
  oc3(OTel Collector)
  ta --> pm
  ta --> sm
  oc1 --> ta
  oc2 --> ta
  oc3 --> ta
  sm ~~~|"1. Discover Prometheus Operator CRs"| sm
  ta ~~~|"2. Add job to TA scrape configuration"| ta
  oc3 ~~~|"3. Add job to OTel Collector scrape configuration"| oc3
```
```

---
title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry: Better Together
linkTitle: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry
date: 2024-03-10
author: 
  [Reese Lee](https://github.com/reese-lee) (New Relic),
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (ServiceNow)

> draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
> # canonical_url: http://somewhere.else/ # This will be added in future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

---

![Image of a Greek god holding a torch with the Prometheus logo, and OTel logo](Prom-and-otel-logos.png)

Tools such as [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [OpenTelemetry](/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/) 
help us monitor the health, performance, and 
availability of our complex distributed systems. Both are open source projects 
under the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)](https://www.cncf.io/) 
umbrella – but what role does each play in observability? 

OpenTelemetry (OTel for short), is a vendor-neutral open standard for 
instrumenting, generating, collecting, and exporting telemetry data.
Prometheus is a fixture of the observability landscape, widely relied upon 
for monitoring and alerting within organizations. 

While both Prometheus and OTel emit metrics, there is a lot to cover on the 
differences and similarities, and is out of scope for this article. Rather, we 
want to show you how OTel supports Prometheus, specifically in a Kubernetes 
environment. You'll learn:

> * How the OTel Collector's Prometheus Receiver can be used to ingest Prometheus 

Reviewer 3: Link to the github repo folder of the receiver

metrics. 
* Alternative methods for Prometheus metric collection through OTel-native 
options such as the K8s cluster receiver and Kubelet stats receiver.

We'll also do a technical dive into the OTel Operator's Target Allocator (TA) 
and learn:
* How it can be used for Prometheus service discovery.
* How it ensures even distribution of Prometheus targets. 

> ## OTel vs Prometheus

Reviewer 3: `vs` sounds like this is going into details why the one is better than the other? Can we word this differently?

Since OTel is primarily focused on the instrumentation part of observability,
it doesn't provide a backend for storing telemetry; you have to forward the 
data to a backend vendor for storage, alerting, and querying. 

Prometheus, on the other hand, provides a time-series data store you can use 
for your metrics, in addition to instrumentation clients. You can view 
graphs and charts, set up alerts, and query your data via their web user 
interface. It also encompasses a data format, known as [Prometheus 
text-based exposition format](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#exposition-formats).

Prometheus _data_ is stored as a dimensional time-series, meaning that the data 
has attributes (for example, labels or dimensions) and a timestamp. 

The Prometheus _server_ collects Prometheus metrics data from targets defined in a 

> configuration file. A target is an endpoint that supplies metrics for the 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
configuration file. A target is an endpoint that exposes metrics for the 
```

Prometheus server to store.

Prometheus is so ubiquitous in the monitoring space that many tools natively 
emit metrics in Prometheus format, including [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/system-metrics/) and [HashiCorp's Nomad](https://developer.hashicorp.com/nomad/docs/operations/monitoring-nomad). And for those that don’t, there are a number 

> of vendor- and community-built Prometheus clients to aggregate and import data 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of vendor- and community-built [Prometheus exporters](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exporters/) to aggregate and import data 
```

Unfortunately the correct term here is a Prometheus exporter tbh. Prometheus client would mean the SDK.

into Prometheus.

While you can use Prometheus to monitor a variety of infrastructure and 
application metrics, one of its most popular use cases is to monitor Kubernetes. 
This is the aspect of Prometheus monitoring that we will focus on in this 
article.

## Prometheus metrics with OpenTelemetry
In this section, you will learn about a couple of OTel Collector components that 
demonstrate the interoperability between OTel and Prometheus.  

First, let’s do a quick refresher on the [Collector](/docs/collector/) 

> – it’s an OTel component that can be used to collect and export data from and to 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
– it’s an OTel component that can be used to collect telemetry from multiple sources and export data to multiple destinations
```

Though i like the original sentence, I find this to be a bit more readable for wider audiences.

> multiple sources and destinations, respectively. It also handles additional telemetry 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
multiple sources and destinations, respectively. The collector also handles telemetry 
```

* If the replicas are running with the same config, it will scrape the targets 
multiple times
* You will need to configure each replica with a different scraping config if 
you want to manually shard the scraping

The [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter) allows you to ship data in the 
Prometheus format, which can then be scraped by a Prometheus server. It is used 
to report metrics via the Prometheus scrape HTTP endpoint. You can learn more by 
trying out this [example](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/main/example/prometheus). 

On the flip side, if you are generating OTel metrics and you want to ship them 
to a backend that is compatible with Prometheus remote write (such as 
[Thanos](https://thanos.io/)), you can use the [Prometheus remote write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md). Prometheus remote write allows you to write data to external storage – in 
this case, backends that are compatible with Prometheus. 

## Using the Target Allocator 

> A common challenge with Prometheus is that of scalability, which is the ability 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Scalability is a common challenge with Prometheus; that is the ability
```

* **mode:** This is one of four [OTel Collector deployment modes supported by the Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator?tab=readme-ov-file#deployment-modes): 
Sidecar, Deployment, StatefulSet and DaemonSet. 
* **targetallocator:** This is where you configure the Target Allocator. Note 
that the [Target Allocator only works for the Deployment, DaemonSet, and StatefulSet modes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uwq4EPaMJFM). 
* **config:** This is where the OTel Collector config resides.

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otelcol
  namespace: opentelemetry
spec:
  mode: statefulset
  targetAllocator:
    enabled: true
    serviceAccount: opentelemetry-targetallocator-sa
    prometheusCR:
      enabled: true
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:
      prometheus:
        config:
          scrape_configs:
          - job_name: 'otel-collector'
            scrape_interval: 30s
            static_configs:
            - targets: [ '0.0.0.0:8888' ]
        target_allocator:
          endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
          interval: 30s

>           collector_id: "${POD_NAME}"

Reviewer 5: [note: we actually do this automatically for users now!](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/pkg/featuregate/featuregate.go#L58-L65)

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: sm-example
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
    release: prometheus
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-app
  namespaceSelector:
      matchNames:
        - opentelemetry
  endpoints:
    - port: prom
      interval: 15s
```

The corresponding `Service` definition, which is just a standard [Kubernetes Service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) definition, is as 
follows:  

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: py-prometheus-app
  namespace: opentelemetry
  labels:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-app
    app.kubernetes.io/name: py-prometheus-app
  ports:
    - name: prom
      port: 8080
```

Because the `Service` has a label called `app: my-app` and a port named `prom`, 
it will get picked up by the `ServiceMonitor`.

You can either create separate `ServiceMonitors` for each service you wish to 
monitor, or create a single `ServiceMonitor` to encompass all of your services. 
The same applies for the `PodMonitor`.

> Before the Target Allocator can start scraping, you need to set up a Kubernetes, 
> or role-based access controls. This means that you need to have a [`ServiceAccount`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/) and 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Before the Target Allocator can start scraping, you need to set up Kubernetes 
role-based access controls. This means that you need to have a [`ServiceAccount`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/) and 
```

---

> title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry: Better Together

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry - Better Together
```

linkTitle: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry
date: 2024-03-10

> author: 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
author: >-
```

  [Reese Lee](https://github.com/reese-lee) (New Relic),
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (ServiceNow)

> draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
cSpell:ignore: sharded hashmod targetallocator Kubelet
```

value that associates OTel context with a metric event, you can also use the
Prometheus receiver to ingest them in the Prometheus format and convert it to
OTLP format. This enables you to correlate traces with metrics.

Something to consider with this component is that it is under active
development; as such, it has several
[limitations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md#%EF%B8%8F-warning),
including that it’s a stateful component. Additionally, it is recommended to not
use this component when multiple replicas of the Collector are run, because in
this state:

- The Collector is unable to auto-scale the scraping
- If the replicas are running with the same config, it will scrape the targets
  multiple times
- You will need to configure each replica with a different scraping config if
  you want to manually shard the scraping

For exporting metrics from the OTel Collector to Prometheus, you have two
options: the
[Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter),
and the

> [Prometheus Remote Write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md).

Reviewer 3: Prometheus also supports OTLP natively now, this is something that should be mentioned, see https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/

Reviewer 3: I see now that you call this out in the conclusion, you might mention this hear already as well since otherwise people will not read to the bottom of the page and do not learn that.

Author: Sounds good! I added it to this section.

without needing to install Prometheus. The TA manages the configuration of the
Collector’s Prometheus Receiver.

The Target Allocator serves two functions:

- Even distribution of Prometheus targets among a pool of OTel Collectors
- Discovery of Prometheus custom resources

Let’s dig into each of these.

#### Even distribution of Prometheus targets

The Target Allocator’s first job is to discover targets to scrape and OTel
Collectors to allocate targets to. It does so as follows:

1. The Target Allocator finds all of the the metrics targets to scrape
2. The Target Allocator finds all of the available Collectors
3. The Target Allocator determines which Collectors scrape which metrics
4. The Collectors query the Target Allocator to find out what metrics to scrape
5. The Collectors scrape their assigned targets

This means that the OTel collectors -- not a Prometheus scraper -- collect the
metrics.

A **Target** is an endpoint that supplies Metrics for Prometheus to store. A
**Scrape** is the action of collecting Metrics through an HTTP request from a
targeted instance, parsing the response, and ingesting the collected samples to
storage.

> ````mermaid

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```mermaid
```

sequenceDiagram
  participant Target Allocator
  participant Metrics Targets
  participant OTel Collectors
  Target Allocator ->>Metrics Targets: 1. Discover Metrics targets
  Target Allocator ->>OTel Collectors: 2. Discover available Collectors
  Target Allocator ->>Target Allocator: 3. Assign Metrics targets
  OTel Collectors ->>Target Allocator: 4. Query TA for Metrics endpoints scrape

>   OTel Collectors ->>Metrics Targets: 5. Scrape Metrics target

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  OTel Collectors ->>Metrics Targets: 5. Scrape Metrics target ```
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

```

#### Discovery of Prometheus custom resources
The Target Allocator’s second job is to provide the discovery of Prometheus
Operator CRs, namely the [ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/tree/main/cmd/otel-allocator#target-allocator).

In the past, all Prometheus scrape configurations had to be done via the
Prometheus Receiver. When the Target Allocator’s service
discovery feature is enabled, the TA simplifies the configuration of the
Prometheus receiver, by creating scrape configurations in the Prometheus
receiver from the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor instances deployed in your
cluster.

```mermaid
flowchart RL
  pm(PodMonitor)
  sm(ServiceMonitor)
  ta(Target Allocator)
  oc1(OTel Collector)
  oc2(OTel Collector)
  oc3(OTel Collector)
  ta --> pm
  ta --> sm
  oc1 --> ta
  oc2 --> ta
  oc3 --> ta
  sm ~~~|"1. Discover Prometheus Operator CRs"| sm
  ta ~~~|"2. Add job to TA scrape configuration"| ta

>   oc3 ~~~|"3. Add job to OTel Collector scrape configuration"| oc3

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  oc3 ~~~|"3. Add job to OTel Collector scrape configuration"| oc3 ```
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

```

[Prometheus exporters](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exporters/) to
aggregate and import data into Prometheus.

While you can use Prometheus to monitor a variety of infrastructure and
application metrics, one of its most popular use cases is to monitor Kubernetes.
This is the aspect of Prometheus monitoring that we will focus on in this
article.

## Prometheus metrics with OpenTelemetry

In this section, you'll learn about a couple of OTel Collector components that
demonstrate the interoperability between OTel and Prometheus.

First, let’s do a quick refresher on the [Collector](/docs/collector/) – it’s an
OTel component that can be used to collect telemetry from multiple sources and
export data to multiple destinations. The Collector also handles telemetry
processing, such as modifying data attributes and scrubbing personally
identifiable information. For example, you can use Prometheus SDKs to generate
metrics, ingest them with the Collector, do some processing (if desired) and
then forward them to your chosen backend.

![Diagram showing the different components of the OTel Collector](OTel-collector-refresher.png)

The

> [Prometheus receiver](/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#prometheus-receiver)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Prometheus receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver)
```

That page does not exist and breaks the URL check

Author: That's odd, it does exist... https://opentelemetry.io/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#prometheus-receiver  but I replaced it with your suggestion.

Reviewer 3: hm, maybe I did a mistake here and the problem was with the host metrics receiver from the start, but let's leave it like that for now, I just want to get this PR working :-)

of configurations in `scrape_config`.

If you are interested in
[exemplars](/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars), which is a recorded
value that associates OTel context with a metric event, you can also use the
Prometheus receiver to ingest them in the Prometheus format and convert it to
OTLP format. This enables you to correlate traces with metrics.

Something to consider with this component is that it is under active
development; as such, it has several
[limitations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md#%EF%B8%8F-warning),
including that it’s a stateful component. Additionally, it is not recommended to
use this component when multiple replicas of the Collector are run *without the target allocator*,
because in this state:

- The Collector is unable to auto-scale the scraping
- If the replicas are running with the same config, it will scrape the targets
  multiple times
- You will need to configure each replica with a different scraping config if
  you want to manually shard the scraping

> For exporting metrics from the OTel Collector to Prometheus, you have two

Reviewer 8: You can also use the OTLP HTTP Exporter which comes by default with the Collector and then you get to use Prometheus's native OTLP endpoint that since the draft of this blogpost has got a list of performance improvements and its being further improved.

and the
[Prometheus Remote Write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md).
Note that
[Prometheus also now supports OTLP natively](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/).

The Prometheus exporter allows you to ship data in the Prometheus format, which
is then scraped by a Prometheus server. It's used to report metrics via the
Prometheus scrape HTTP endpoint. You can learn more by trying out this
[example](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/main/example/prometheus).
However, the scraping won't really scale, as all the metrics are sent in a
single scrape.

To get around the scaling concern, you can alternatively use the Prometheus
Remote Write exporter, which allows you to push data to Prometheus from multiple
Collector instances with no issues. Since Prometheus also accepts remote write
ingestion, you can also use this exporter if you are generating OTel metrics and
want to ship them to a backend that is compatible with Prometheus remote write.

> Learn more about the architecture of both exporters
> [here](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/07/20/a-practical-guide-to-data-collection-with-opentelemetry-and-prometheus/#6-use-prometheus-remote-write-exporter).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
To learn more about the architecture of both exporters, see [Use Prometheus
Remote Write
exporter](https://grafana.com/blog/2023/07/20/a-practical-guide-to-data-collection-with-opentelemetry-and-prometheus/#6-use-prometheus-remote-write-exporter).
```

        config:
          scrape_configs:
          - job_name: 'otel-collector'
            scrape_interval: 30s
            static_configs:
            - targets: [ '0.0.0.0:8888' ]
        target_allocator:
          endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
          interval: 30s
          collector_id: "${POD_NAME}"
…
```

To use the Target Allocator, you need to set `spec.targetallocator.enabled` to
`true`. (See previous note about supported modes.)

Next, you need to make sure that the Prometheus receiver of the deployed
Collector is made aware of the Target Allocator in the Collector config section
of the spec by setting the `target_allocator.endpoint`:

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otel-collector'
          scrape_interval: 30s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']
    target_allocator:
      endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
      interval: 30s
      collector_id: '${POD_NAME}'
```

The Target Allocator endpoint that the Prometheus receiver config is pointing to
is a concatenation of the OTel Collector’s name (`otelcol`, in our case) and the
`-targetallocator` suffix.

> [(This is now done automatically for users!)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/pkg/featuregate/featuregate.go#L58-L65)

Reviewer 9: What is the "this" that you are referring to that is "now done automatically"?
Also, is linking into a code file the best reference you have at hand?
I'm not sure I find the link destination that helpful to convince me/a reader of your statement. 
Also note that the lines that you refer to aren't in the code anymore 🤷🏼‍♂️ 
Maybe just drop the link, unless you can link to some docs or a blog post. WDYT?

Reviewer 7: Yeah, good point. Let's drop it then.

  resources:
    - servicemonitors
    - podmonitors
  verbs:
    - '*'
- apiGroups: ['']
  resources:
    - namespaces
  verbs: ['get', 'list', 'watch']
```

## Additional OTel components for Kubernetes

This section covers additional OTel Collector components you can use to capture
Kubernetes metrics.

Receiving data:

- [Kubernetes Cluster Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver):
  collects cluster-level metrics and entity events from the
  [Kubernetes API server](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-apiserver/)
- [Kubernetes Objects Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sobjectsreceiver):
  collects (pull/watch) objects from the Kubernetes API server
- [Kubelet Stats Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/kubeletstatsreceiver):
  pulls node, pod, container, and volume metrics from the API server on a
  [Kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/)
  and sends it down the metric pipeline for further processing

> - [Host Metrics Receiver](/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#host-metrics-receiver):

Reviewer 3: Ah, there is another one!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Host Metrics Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/hostmetricsreceiver):
```

Author: Odd... This one does too https://opentelemetry.io/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/#host-metrics-receiver Might be a bigger issue that you might want to look into? But I'll commit your suggestion in the meantime.

  scrapes system metrics from hosts that make up the cluster

Processing data:

> - [Kubernetes Attributes Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor):
>   adds Kubernetes context, thereby
> - enabling you to correlate application telemetry with your Kubernetes telemetry
> - – considered one of the most important components for monitoring Kubernetes
> - with OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- [Kubernetes Attributes
  Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor):
  adds Kubernetes context, thereby enabling you to correlate application
  telemetry with your Kubernetes telemetry -- considered one of the most
  important components for monitoring Kubernetes with OpenTelemetry
```

You can also use the Kubernetes attributes processor to set custom resource
attributes for traces, metrics, and logs using the Kubernetes labels and
annotations you’ve added to your pods and namespaces.

There are a few more Collector components you can implement to monitor
Kubernetes, including Kubernetes-specific ones as well as general-use

> processors, such as the batch, memory limiter, and resource processors. You can
> read more about them [here](docs/kubernetes/collector/components/).

Reviewer 9: The link path is missing a leading `/` (it is invalid otherwise). Let's rework this to avoid the "here" link text:

```suggestion
processors, such as the batch, memory limiter, and resource processors. To learn
more, see [Important Components for
Kubernetes](/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/).
```

  have to learn how to use your backend’s query language.
- OTel itself contains many moving parts, and presents its own challenges with
  scalability and adoption.
- Maturity and stability within OTel varies; Prometheus has a mature ecosystem.
- Additional computational and human resources needed to maintain OTel
  components.
- Managing and maintaining both Prometheus and OTel components introduces
  operational complexity in your monitoring infrastructure.

## Conclusion

Prometheus maintainers have also been further developing the interoperability
between the two projects from the Prometheus side to make it easier for it to be
the backend for OTLP metrics. For instance, Prometheus can now accept OTLP, and
soon, you’ll be able to use Prometheus exporters to export OTLP. So if you have
a service instrumented with a Prometheus SDK, you’ll be able to _push_ OTLP and
take advantage of the rich Prometheus exporter ecosystem for OTel users. The
maintainers are also working on adding support for delta temporality. This
[component](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/30479)

> will aggregate delta samples to their respective cumulative counterparts. Read
> more about Prometheus' commitment to OTel
> [here](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/)!

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
will aggregate delta samples to their respective cumulative counterparts. For
more about Prometheus' commitment to OTel, see [Our commitment to
OpenTelemetry](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/).
```

OTel component that can be used to collect telemetry from multiple sources and
export data to multiple destinations. The Collector also handles telemetry
processing, such as modifying data attributes and scrubbing personally
identifiable information. For example, you can use Prometheus SDKs to generate
metrics, ingest them with the Collector, do some processing (if desired) and
then forward them to your chosen backend.

![Diagram showing the different components of the OTel Collector](OTel-collector-refresher.png)

The
[Prometheus receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver)
allows you to collect metrics from any software that exposes Prometheus metrics.
It serves as a drop-in replacement for Prometheus to scrape your services, and
supports the
[full set](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/v2.28.1/docs/configuration/configuration.md#scrape_config)
of configurations in `scrape_config`.

If you are interested in
[exemplars](/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars), which is a recorded
value that associates OTel context with a metric event, you can also use the

> Prometheus receiver to ingest them in the Prometheus format and convert it to

Author: @dashpole You can still use the Prometheus receiver, right? Are there any gotchas we should call out in regards to exemplars being only available in OpenMetrics format? 

Would this be accurate to say:

>If you are interested in
[exemplars](/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#exemplars), which is a recorded
value that associates OTel context with a metric event, you can also use the
Prometheus receiver. Note that exemplars are currently only available in OpenMetrics format.

> Prometheus receiver to ingest them in the Prometheus format and convert it to

Reviewer 10: Yes, you can still use the prometheus receiver.  OpenMetrics format is usually opt-in for prometheus clients (e.g. https://github.com/prometheus/client_golang/blob/aa3c00d2ee32f97a06edc29716ae80ba0e713b9e/prometheus/promhttp/http.go#L408)

Yes.  that looks correct

OTLP format. This enables you to correlate traces with metrics.

Something to consider with this component is that it is under active
development; as such, it has several
[limitations](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/prometheusreceiver/README.md#%EF%B8%8F-warning),

> including that it’s a stateful component. Additionally, it is recommended to not
> use this component when multiple replicas of the Collector are run, because in
> this state:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
including that it’s a stateful component. Additionally, it is not recommended to
use this component when multiple replicas of the Collector are run *without the target allocator*,
because in this state:
```

options: the
[Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/prometheusexporter#prometheus-exporter),
and the
[Prometheus Remote Write exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/exporter/prometheusremotewriteexporter/README.md).
Note that
[Prometheus also now supports OTLP natively](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/).

The Prometheus exporter allows you to ship data in the Prometheus format, which
is then scraped by a Prometheus server. It's used to report metrics via the
Prometheus scrape HTTP endpoint. You can learn more by trying out this
[example](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go/tree/main/example/prometheus).
However, the scraping won't really scale, as all the metrics are sent in a
single scrape.

To get around the scaling concern, you can alternatively use the Prometheus
Remote Write exporter, which allows you to push data to Prometheus from multiple
Collector instances with no issues. Since Prometheus also accepts remote write
ingestion, you can also use this exporter if you are generating OTel metrics and

> want to ship them to a backend that is compatible with Prometheus remote write.

Reviewer 10: Might be worth mentioning that PRW in the Prometheus Server doesn't currently support metadata (help, description).  See https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/13163 and https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/12608.  This is being addressed in PRW 2.0: https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/#io-prometheus-write-v2-request

Author: Added this:
>Note that the Prometheus Remote Write in the Prometheus Server doesn't currently 
support metadata, such as Help and Type. For more information, check
out [issue #13163](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/13163) as well as [issue #12608](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/issues/12608). This will be addressed in [Prometheus Remote Write v2.0](https://prometheus.io/docs/specs/remote_write_spec_2_0/#io-prometheus-write-v2-request).

is sharding the workload based on labels or dimensions,
[which means using multiple Prometheus instances to handle your metrics according to specific parameters](https://medium.com/wish-engineering/horizontally-scaling-prometheus-at-wish-ea4b694318dd).
This could help decrease the burden on individual instances. However, there are
two things to consider with this approach.

The first is that to get around querying sharded instances, you need a
management instance; this means that you need to have N+1 Prometheus instances,
where the +1’s memory is equal to N, thereby doubling your memory requests.
Secondly, Prometheus sharding requires that each instance scrape the target,
even if it’s going to be dropped.

Something to note is that if you can have a Prometheus instance with the
combined amount of memory of individual instances, there is not much benefit to
sharding, since you can scrape everything directly using the larger instance. A
reason that people shard is usually for some amount of fault tolerance. For
example, if one Prometheus instance is out of memory (OOM), then your entire
alerting pipeline won't be offline.

> Luckily, the OTel Operator’s Target Allocator (TA) is able to help with some of
> this. For instance, it can automatically drop any targets it knows won’t be
> scraped. Whereas if you shard with `hashmod`, you'll need to
> [update your config based on the number of replicas you have](https://www.robustperception.io/scaling-and-federating-prometheus/).
> Plus, if you’re already collecting Prometheus metrics about your Kubernetes
> infrastructure, using the TA is a great option.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Luckily, the OTel Operator’s Target Allocator (TA) is able to help with some of
this. For instance, it can automatically drop any targets it knows won’t be
scraped. The TA also automatically shards the targets for you, whereas if you shard with `hashmod` you'll need to
[update your config based on the number of replicas you have](https://www.robustperception.io/scaling-and-federating-prometheus/). The TA also allows you to continue using resources like PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor to continue collecting Prometheus metrics about your Kubernetes
infrastructure.
```

  ta --> pm
  ta --> sm
  oc1 --> ta
  oc2 --> ta
  oc3 --> ta
  sm ~~~|"1. Discover Prometheus Operator CRs"| sm
  ta ~~~|"2. Add job to TA scrape configuration"| ta
  oc3 ~~~|"3. Add job to OTel Collector scrape configuration"| oc3
```

Even though Prometheus is not required to be installed in your Kubernetes
cluster to use the Target Allocator for Prometheus CR discovery, the TA does
require that the ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor be installed. These CRs are
bundled with Prometheus Operator; however, they can be installed standalone as
well. The easiest way to do this is to grab a copy of the individual
[PodMonitor YAML](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack/charts/crds/crds/crd-podmonitors.yaml)
and
[ServiceMonitor YAML](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack/charts/crds/crds/crd-servicemonitors.yaml)
custom resource definitions (CRDs).

OTel supports the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor Prometheus resources because
these are widely-used in Kubernetes infrastructure monitoring. As a result, the
OTel Operator developers wanted to make it easy to add them to the OTel
ecosystem.

> Note that the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor are not useful for cluster-wide

Reviewer 10: "cluster-wide" feels misleading.  I would describe the limitation as "PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor are limited to collecting metrics from pods, and are unable to scrape other endpoints, such as the kubelet."

        config:
          scrape_configs:
          - job_name: 'otel-collector'
            scrape_interval: 30s
            static_configs:
            - targets: [ '0.0.0.0:8888' ]
        target_allocator:
          endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
          interval: 30s
          collector_id: "${POD_NAME}"
…
```

To use the Target Allocator, you need to set `spec.targetallocator.enabled` to
`true`. (See previous note about supported modes.)

Next, you need to make sure that the Prometheus receiver of the deployed
Collector is made aware of the Target Allocator in the Collector config section
of the spec by setting the `target_allocator.endpoint`:

```yaml
receivers:
  prometheus:
    config:
      scrape_configs:
        - job_name: 'otel-collector'
          scrape_interval: 30s
          static_configs:
            - targets: ['0.0.0.0:8888']
    target_allocator:
      endpoint: http://otelcol-targetallocator
      interval: 30s
      collector_id: '${POD_NAME}'
```

The Target Allocator endpoint that the Prometheus receiver config is pointing to
is a concatenation of the OTel Collector’s name (`otelcol`, in our case) and the
`-targetallocator` suffix.

> [(This is now done automatically for users!)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/pkg/featuregate/featuregate.go#L58-L65)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

These give the Target Allocator access to the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor CRs.
It also gives namespace access to the PodMonitor and ServiceMonitor.

```yaml
- apiGroups:
    - monitoring.coreos.com
  resources:
    - servicemonitors
    - podmonitors
  verbs:
    - '*'
- apiGroups: ['']
  resources:
    - namespaces
  verbs: ['get', 'list', 'watch']
```

## Additional OTel components for Kubernetes

This section covers additional OTel Collector components you can use to capture
Kubernetes metrics.

Receiving data:

- [Kubernetes Cluster Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sclusterreceiver):
  collects cluster-level metrics and entity events from the
  [Kubernetes API server](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kube-apiserver/)
- [Kubernetes Objects Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/k8sobjectsreceiver):
  collects (pull/watch) objects from the Kubernetes API server
- [Kubelet Stats Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/kubeletstatsreceiver):

>   pulls node, pod, container, and volume metrics from the API server on a

Reviewer 10: I would just say it pulls metrics from the kubelet.  API server in k8s usually refers to something serving k8s resources, which the kubelet does not.

  adds Kubernetes context, thereby
- enabling you to correlate application telemetry with your Kubernetes telemetry
- – considered one of the most important components for monitoring Kubernetes
- with OpenTelemetry

You can also use the Kubernetes attributes processor to set custom resource
attributes for traces, metrics, and logs using the Kubernetes labels and
annotations you’ve added to your pods and namespaces.

There are a few more Collector components you can implement to monitor
Kubernetes, including Kubernetes-specific ones as well as general-use
processors, such as the batch, memory limiter, and resource processors. To learn
more, see
[Important Components for Kubernetes](/docs/kubernetes/collector/components/).

After you’ve configured the components in your Collector config file, you need
to enable them within the [pipelines](/docs/collector/configuration/#pipelines)
section. A data pipeline enables you to
[collect](/docs/collector/configuration/#receivers),
[process](/docs/collector/configuration/#processors), and route data from any
source [to one destination or more](/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters).

## Pros and cons

> The following are pros and cons of the setup we covered in this article.

Reviewer 10: Is this compared to running the standard kube-prometheus stack?  (https://github.com/prometheus-operator/kube-prometheus). Or what is this being compared to?

Reviewer 7: Pros and cons of having an "OTel native" approach to ingesting Prometheus metrics.

Author: @dashpole Based on ^^, do you have any suggestions for things that need to be edited?

Reviewer 10: For example, the pro of "not having to maintain prometheus" applies to users that are running prometheus as their data store. It seemed like there was some alternative to the approach above you had in mind, but wasn't called out.

Maybe replace items related to maintaining prometheus, or using promQL with statements about flexibility?  E.g. Pro: Export data to any backend which has an collector exporter, or supports OTLP.

**Pros:**

- Not having to maintain Prometheus as your data store, which means less
  infrastructure overall to maintain -- especially if you go with an all-in-one
  observability backend to ingest OTel data (traces, metrics, logs).

> - Not having to maintain the Prometheus Operator; while you would still have to

Reviewer 10: You need to maintain the OTel operator, right?

Author: @avillela ^^

Reviewer 7: Yes, totally true that you would still have to maintain the OTel Operator, but at least you're not having to maintain the Prometheus Operator AND the OTel Operator. I wonder if we just remove the part on maintaining the Prometheus Operator because it just adds confusion.

  maintain the ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor, it’s a lot less work than keeping
  the Operator up-to-date.
- Allows you to end up with a full OTel solution while still obtaining your
  Prometheus metrics
- OTel can provide traces and logs in addition to metrics, as well as
  correlation of these signals, thus enhancing the observability of Kubernetes
  environments.
- OTel provides handy tools, such as the Target Allocator and OTel Collector
  components, to provide flexibility for configuration and deployment options.

**Cons:**

- Adopting and managing a new observability tool involves a steep learning curve
  for users unfamiliar with OTel concepts, components, and workflows.

> - If you are used to using PromQL, Prometheus’ powerful query language, you may

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Users of PromQL, Prometheus’ powerful query language, can still use it IF they send metrics to a Prometheus-compatible back-end.
```

Like this, @jaronoff97 ?

>   have to learn how to use your backend’s query language.

Reviewer 5: users can still use PromQL if they send to a prometheus-compatible DB, though this is one of many options...

>   have to learn how to use your backend’s query language.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
IF they send metrics to a Prometheus-compatible back-end.
```

Related to re-word above

between the two projects from the Prometheus side to make it easier for it to be
the backend for OTLP metrics. For instance, Prometheus can now accept OTLP, and
soon, you’ll be able to use Prometheus exporters to export OTLP. So if you have
a service instrumented with a Prometheus SDK, you’ll be able to _push_ OTLP and
take advantage of the rich Prometheus exporter ecosystem for OTel users. The
maintainers are also working on adding support for delta temporality. This
[component](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/30479)
will aggregate delta samples to their respective cumulative counterparts. For
more about Prometheus' commitment to OTel, see
[Our commitment to OpenTelemetry](https://prometheus.io/blog/2024/03/14/commitment-to-opentelemetry/).

However you decide to use OTel to gather Prometheus metrics, ultimately what is
right for your organization depends on your business needs. Using the OTel
components discussed previously, you could convert all your metrics into the
Prometheus format, or you could convert your Prometheus metrics into OTLP.
Although Prometheus itself was not built for long-term data storage and presents

> scaling challenges, there are products such as

Reviewer 10: should this be "open-source projects", rather than "products"?

---
title: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry - Better Together
linkTitle: Prometheus and OpenTelemetry

> date: 2024-03-31

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2024-09-04
```
